[MLOB] add Troubleshooting section Cost page (#36455)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/llm_observability/monitoring/cost.md

- `@metrics.cache_write_input_tokens` / `@metrics.estimated_cache_write_input_cost`
- `@metrics.reasoning_output_tokens` / `@metrics.estimated_reasoning_output_cost`

## FAQ

### Why does my trace show "PARTIAL COST" or "COST UNAVAILABLE"?

Each LLM span in a trace is priced independently. The warning appears when one or more LLM spans in the trace are missing a cost estimate:

> - **Partial cost** — some LLM spans in the trace have a cost, while others do not. The **Estimated Cost** value only reflects the priced spans.

Reviewer: Definition list uses em dash; style guide requires colon. Also fixes "only" placement (modifier should sit directly before what it modifies).

```suggestion
- **Partial cost**: Some LLM spans in the trace have a cost, while others do not. The **Estimated Cost** value reflects only the priced spans.
```

> - **Cost unavailable** — none of the LLM spans in the trace have a cost.

Reviewer: Definition list uses em dash; style guide requires colon.

```suggestion
- **Cost unavailable**: None of the LLM spans in the trace have a cost.
```

> Hover over the warning to see how many spans are missing cost, the reason for each missing cost, and the names of the affected spans. The reasons fall into one of the categories below.

Reviewer: "below" is directional language; replace with "following".

```suggestion
Hover over the warning to see how many spans are missing cost, the reason for each missing cost, and the names of the affected spans. The reasons fall into one of the following categories.
```

### Unsupported model provider

The LLM model provider on the span is not in the [list of supported providers](#supported-providers), so Datadog has no public pricing rates to apply.

How to fix:
- Switch to a [supported provider](#supported-providers).
- Manually supply cost values on the span. See the [SDK Reference][2] or [API][3].

### Unsupported model name

The LLM provider is supported, but the `model_name` on the span does not match any entry in the provider's [pricing catalog][4]. This usually happens when the model name is misspelled, abbreviated, or uses an internal alias.

How to fix:
- Update the span's `model_name` to match the official name in the provider's [pricing catalog][4].
- For privately deployed or customized variants of a supported model, manually supply cost values on the span. See the [SDK Reference][2] or [API][3].

### Missing token counts

The span has no `input_tokens` or `output_tokens` annotation, so Datadog has no token values to multiply by the per-token rate. (For embedding spans, only `input_tokens` is required.)

How to fix:

> - For [auto-instrumentation][1], confirm your provider and SDK version are supported

Reviewer: Inconsistent end punctuation in this list — this bullet is missing a period, but the next one has them. If any item in a list is a full sentence, all items need end punctuation.

```suggestion
- For [auto-instrumentation][1], confirm your provider and SDK version are supported.
```

- For manual instrumentation, annotate input and output token counts on the span. See the [SDK Reference][2] or [API][3].

### Unsupported pricing tier

> The provider charges different rates per region, context window size, or other pricing tier, and Datadog does not have a pricing entry for the tier this span hit.

Reviewer: "the tier this span hit" reads informally.

```suggestion
The provider charges different rates per region, context window size, or other pricing tier, and Datadog does not have a pricing entry for the tier this span uses.
```

How to fix:

> - Manually supply input and output cost values on the span. See the [SDK Reference][2] or [API][3].

Reviewer: Optional: this single-bullet list could be rewritten as prose ("To fix, manually supply input and output cost values on the span. See the [SDK Reference][2] or [API][3]."), but keeping it as a bullet preserves parallel structure with the other reasons. Up to you.

- `@metrics.cache_write_input_tokens` / `@metrics.estimated_cache_write_input_cost`
- `@metrics.reasoning_output_tokens` / `@metrics.estimated_reasoning_output_cost`

> ## FAQ

Reviewer 2: Maybe Frequently Asked Questions might be better here?

Author: Hmm I don't have a preference but I do see "FAQ" in our doc ([example](https://docs.datadoghq.com/account_management/billing/apm_tracing_profiler/#faq)) so maybe it's fine? 
@domalessi what do you think?

Reviewer: Actually, we should maybe change this to "Troubleshooting". We try to [stay away from FAQs](https://datadoghq.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/docs4docs/pages/2267056188/Content+Types#Why-we-don%E2%80%99t-use-traditional-question-answer-FAQs) in the docs. Does that work?

Reviewer: In line with that, let's change the question format to a statement, e.g. `Why does my trace show **PARTIAL COST** or **COST UNAVAILABLE**?` -> `Trace shows **PARTIAL COST** or **COST UNAVAILABLE**`?

Author: Okay we can do that!

### Why does my trace show **PARTIAL COS** or **COST UNAVAILABLE**?

Each LLM span in a trace is priced independently. The warning appears when one or more LLM spans in the trace are missing a cost estimate:

> - **PARTIAL COST**: Some LLM spans in the trace have a cost, while others do not. The **Estimated Cost** value reflects only the priced spans.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **PARTIAL COST**: Costs were computed for some LLM spans in the trace, but not for the rest. The **Estimated Cost** value reflects the sum of only the spans for which cost was computed.
```
This could be improved a little better though pls

> - **COST UNAVAILABLE**: None of the LLM spans in the trace have a cost.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **COST UNAVAILABLE**: Cost could not be computed for any of the LLM spans in the trace.
```
I think the wording here could be improved, i.e. we weren't able to compute costs for any of the LLM spans in this trace (but obviously better version of what i said lol)

> Hover over the warning to see how many spans are missing cost, the reason for each missing cost, and the names of the affected spans. The reasons fall into one of the following categories.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Hover over the warning to see how many spans are missing cost, the reasons for missing cost, and the names of the affected spans. The reasons fall into one of the following categories.
```

#### Unsupported model provider

The LLM model provider on the span is not in the [list of supported providers](#supported-providers), so Datadog has no public pricing rates to apply.

How to fix:

> - Switch to a [supported provider](#supported-providers).

Reviewer 2: Not necessarily a fix here lol maybe we need to remove

Reviewer 2: Potential fix here could be that they should verify there's no typos on their model_provider value, or ensure that it matches with the support provider matching identifier

- Manually supply cost values on the span. See the [SDK Reference][2] or [API][3].

#### Unsupported model name

The LLM provider is supported, but the `model_name` on the span does not match any entry in the provider's [pricing catalog][4]. This usually happens when the model name is misspelled, abbreviated, or uses an internal alias.

How to fix:
- Update the span's `model_name` to match the official name in the provider's [pricing catalog][4].
- For privately deployed or customized variants of a supported model, manually supply cost values on the span. See the [SDK Reference][2] or [API][3].

> #### Missing token counts

Reviewer 2: OOOO another possible pain point is if they provide only input/output tokens, but no granular cache_read/cache_write/non_cache token counts. We should (separately) detect these cases cause we could potentially be computing inaccurate costs given non-granular token counts and include this as a failure case in this FAQ

Author: Hmm we don't detect this as a skip reason, so I think we should list it as a separate question outside of the partial cost.

> The span has no `input_tokens` or `output_tokens` annotation, so Datadog has no token values to multiply by the per-token rate. (For embedding spans, only `input_tokens` is required.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The span has no `input_tokens` or `output_tokens` annotation, so Datadog has no token values to compute the costs from. (For embedding spans, only `input_tokens` is required.)
```

How to fix:
- For [auto-instrumentation][1], confirm your provider and SDK version are supported.
- For manual instrumentation, annotate input and output token counts on the span. See the [SDK Reference][2] or [API][3].

> #### Unsupported pricing tier

Reviewer 2: How often do we see this failure case? Is it worth adding as a FAQ?

Author: We actually haven't seen this case for the past three months, I'll drop this

- `@metrics.cache_write_input_tokens` / `@metrics.estimated_cache_write_input_cost`
- `@metrics.reasoning_output_tokens` / `@metrics.estimated_reasoning_output_cost`

> ## Troubleshooting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Troubleshooting

If LLM cost values are missing from a trace or appear inaccurate, see the following sections for common causes and fixes.
```

> ### Trace shows **PARTIAL COST** or **COST UNAVAILABLE**

Reviewer: Headers are already bold

```suggestion
### Trace shows PARTIAL COST or COST UNAVAILABLE
```

Each LLM span in a trace is priced independently. The warning appears when one or more LLM spans in the trace are missing a cost estimate:

- **PARTIAL COST**: Costs were computed for some LLM spans in the trace, but not for the rest. The **Estimated Cost** value reflects the sum of only the spans for which cost was computed.

> - **COST UNAVAILABLE**: Cost could not be computed for any of the LLM spans in the trace.

Reviewer: Updating to use active voice

```suggestion
- **PARTIAL COST**: Datadog computed costs for some LLM spans in the trace, but not the rest. The **Estimated Cost** value reflects the sum of only the spans for which cost was computed.
- **COST UNAVAILABLE**: Datadog could not compute cost for any LLM span in the trace.
```

Hover over the warning to see how many spans are missing cost, the reasons for missing cost, and the names of the affected spans. The reasons fall into one of the following categories.

#### Unsupported model provider

The LLM model provider on the span is not in the [list of supported providers](#supported-providers), so Datadog has no public pricing rates to apply.

How to fix:

> - Verify the span's model_provider matches a supported provider identifier (no typos). See the [list of supported providers](#supported-providers).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Verify the span's `model_provider` matches a supported provider identifier. See the [list of supported providers](#supported-providers).
```

- Manually supply cost values on the span. See the [SDK Reference][2] or [API][3].

#### Unsupported model name

The LLM provider is supported, but the `model_name` on the span does not match any entry in the provider's [pricing catalog][4]. This usually happens when the model name is misspelled, abbreviated, or uses an internal alias.

How to fix:
- Update the span's `model_name` to match the official name in the provider's [pricing catalog][4].
- For privately deployed or customized variants of a supported model, manually supply cost values on the span. See the [SDK Reference][2] or [API][3].

#### Missing token counts

> The span has no `input_tokens` or `output_tokens` annotation, so Datadog has no token values to compute the costs from. (For embedding spans, only `input_tokens` is required.)

Reviewer: Minor tweak for flow

```suggestion
The span has no `input_tokens` or `output_tokens` annotation, so Datadog has no token values for cost calculation. (For embedding spans, only `input_tokens` is required.)
```

How to fix:
- For [auto-instrumentation][1], confirm your provider and SDK version are supported.
- For manual instrumentation, annotate input and output token counts on the span. See the [SDK Reference][2] or [API][3].

> ### Cost may appear incorrect when prompt caching is used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Cost may appear incorrect with prompt caching
```

If a span includes only aggregate `input_tokens` and `output_tokens`, but is missing `cache_read_input_tokens`, `cache_write_input_tokens`, or `non_cached_input_tokens`, Datadog applies the standard input rate to the entire `input_tokens`.

> For providers that support prompt caching, cache reads, cache writes, and non-cached inputs are billed at different rates. Without this breakdown, the calculated input cost may be inaccurate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For providers that support prompt caching, cache reads, cache writes, and non-cached inputs are billed at different rates. Without this breakdown, the input cost calculation may be inaccurate.
```

How to fix:
- For [auto-instrumentation][1], verify that your provider and SDK version emit cache-specific token counts.
- For manual instrumentation, annotate `cache_read_input_tokens`, `cache_write_input_tokens`, and `non_cached_input_tokens` in addition to `input_tokens`. See the [SDK Reference][2] or [API][3].

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- `@metrics.cache_write_input_tokens` / `@metrics.estimated_cache_write_input_cost`
- `@metrics.reasoning_output_tokens` / `@metrics.estimated_reasoning_output_cost`

> ## Troubleshooting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Troubleshoot LLM cost monitoring
```

If LLM cost values are missing from a trace or appear inaccurate, see the following sections for common causes and fixes.

> ### Trace shows PARTIAL COST or COST UNAVAILABLE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Trace shows "PARTIAL COST" or "COST UNAVAILABLE"
```

Each LLM span in a trace is priced independently. The warning appears when one or more LLM spans in the trace are missing a cost estimate:

- **PARTIAL COST**: Datadog computed costs for some LLM spans in the trace, but not the rest. The **Estimated Cost** value reflects the sum of only the spans for which cost was computed.
- **COST UNAVAILABLE**: Datadog could not compute cost for any LLM span in the trace.

> Hover over the warning to see how many spans are missing cost, the reasons for missing cost, and the names of the affected spans. The reasons fall into one of the following categories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hover over the warning to see the number of affected spans, the reason cost is missing, and the names of the affected spans. The reasons fall into one of the following categories.
```

How to fix:
- Verify the span's `model_provider` matches a supported provider identifier. See the [list of supported providers](#supported-providers).
- Manually supply cost values on the span. See the [SDK Reference][2] or [API][3].

#### Unsupported model name

The LLM provider is supported, but the `model_name` on the span does not match any entry in the provider's [pricing catalog][4]. This usually happens when the model name is misspelled, abbreviated, or uses an internal alias.

How to fix:
- Update the span's `model_name` to match the official name in the provider's [pricing catalog][4].
- For privately deployed or customized variants of a supported model, manually supply cost values on the span. See the [SDK Reference][2] or [API][3].

#### Missing token counts

The span has no `input_tokens` or `output_tokens` annotation, so Datadog has no token values for cost calculation. (For embedding spans, only `input_tokens` is required.)

How to fix:
- For [auto-instrumentation][1], confirm your provider and SDK version are supported.
- For manual instrumentation, annotate input and output token counts on the span. See the [SDK Reference][2] or [API][3].

> ### Cost may appear incorrect with prompt caching

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Inaccurate cost when prompt caching is enabled
```
